This is a list of the bird species recorded in Bhutan. The avifauna of Bhutan include a total of 760 species, of which one has been introduced by humans.
This list's taxonomic treatment (designation and sequence of orders, families and species) and nomenclature (common and scientific names) follow the conventions of The Clements Checklist of Birds of the World, 2022 edition. The family accounts at the beginning of each heading reflect this taxonomy, as do the species counts found in each family account. Introduced and accidental species are included in the total counts for Bhutan.
The following tags have been used to highlight several categories. The commonly occurring native species do not fall into any of these categories.

(A) Accidental - a species that rarely or accidentally occurs in Bhutan
(I) Introduced - a species introduced to Bhutan as a consequence, direct or indirect, of human actions

Ducks, geese, and waterfowl
Order: Anseriformes   Family: Anatidae
Anatidae includes the ducks and most duck-like waterfowl, such as geese and swans. These birds are adapted to an aquatic existence with webbed feet, flattened bills, and feathers that are excellent at shedding water due to an oily coating.

Pheasants, grouse, and allies
Order: Galliformes   Family: Phasianidae
The Phasianidae are a family of terrestrial birds which consists of quails, partridges, snowcocks, francolins, spurfowls, tragopans, monals, pheasants, peafowls and jungle fowls. In general, they are plump (although they vary in size) and have broad, relatively short wings.

Grebes
Order: Podicipediformes   Family: Podicipedidae
Grebes are small to medium-large freshwater diving birds. They have lobed toes and are excellent swimmers and divers. However, they have their feet placed far back on the body, making them quite ungainly on land.

Little grebe, Tachybaptus ruficollis (A)
Red-necked grebe, Podiceps grisegena (A)
Great crested grebe, Podiceps cristatus
Eared grebe, Podiceps nigricollis (A)

Pigeons and doves
Order: Columbiformes   Family: Columbidae
Pigeons and doves are stout-bodied birds with short necks and short slender bills with a fleshy cere.

Cuckoos
Order: Cuculiformes   Family: Cuculidae
The family Cuculidae includes cuckoos, roadrunners and anis. These birds are of variable size with slender bodies, long tails and strong legs. The Old World cuckoos are brood parasites.

Frogmouths
Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Podargidae
The frogmouths are a group of nocturnal birds related to the nightjars. They are named for their large flattened hooked bill and huge frog-like gape, which they use to take insects.

Hodgson's frogmouth, Batrachostomus hodgsoni

Nightjars and allies
Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Caprimulgidae
Nightjars are medium-sized nocturnal birds that usually nest on the ground. They have long wings, short legs and very short bills. Most have small feet, of little use for walking, and long pointed wings. Their soft plumage is camouflaged to resemble bark or leaves.

Gray nightjar, Caprimulgus indicus
Large-tailed nightjar, Caprimulgus macrurus
Savanna nightjar, Caprimulgus affinis

Swifts
Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Apodidae
Swifts are small birds which spend the majority of their lives flying. These birds have very short legs and never settle voluntarily on the ground, perching instead only on vertical surfaces. Many swifts have long swept-back wings which resemble a crescent or boomerang.

White-rumped needletail, Zoonavena sylvatica (A)
White-throated needletail, Hirundapus caudacutus
Himalayan swiftlet, Aerodramus brevirostris
Alpine swift, Apus melba
Common swift, Apus apus (A)
Plain swift, Apus unicolor (A)
Pacific swift, Apus pacificus
Salim Ali's swift, Apus salimalii (A)
Blyth's swift, Apus leuconyx
Dark-rumped swift, Apus acuticauda
Little swift, Apus affinis (A)
House swift, Apus nipalensis
Asian palm-swift, Cypsiurus balasiensis

Treeswifts
Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Hemiprocnidae
The treeswifts, also called crested swifts, are closely related to the true swifts. They differ from the other swifts in that they have crests, long forked tails and softer plumage.

Crested treeswift, Hemiprocne coronata

Rails, gallinules, and coots
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Rallidae
Rallidae is a large family of small to medium-sized birds which includes the rails, crakes, coots and gallinules. Typically they inhabit dense vegetation in damp environments near lakes, swamps or rivers. In general they are shy and secretive birds, making them difficult to observe. Most species have strong legs and long toes which are well adapted to soft uneven surfaces. They tend to have short, rounded wings and to be weak fliers.

Slaty-breasted rail, Lewinia striata
Eurasian moorhen, Gallinula chloropus (A)
Eurasian coot, Fulica atra
Gray-headed swamphen, Porphyrio poliocephalus (A)
Watercock, Gallicrex cinerea (A)
White-breasted waterhen, Amaurornis phoenicurus
Slaty-legged crake, Rallina eurizonoides (A)
Ruddy-breasted crake, Zapornia fusca
Black-tailed crake, Zapornia bicolor

Cranes
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Gruidae
Cranes are large, long-legged and long-necked birds. Unlike the similar-looking but unrelated herons, cranes fly with necks outstretched, not pulled back. Most have elaborate and noisy courting displays or "dances".

Demoiselle crane, Anthropoides virgo (A)
Common crane, Grus grus (A)
Hooded crane, Grus monacha (A)
Black-necked crane, Grus nigricollis

Thick-knees
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Burhinidae
The thick-knees are a group of largely tropical waders in the family Burhinidae. They are found worldwide within the tropical zone, with some species also breeding in temperate Europe and Australia. They are medium to large waders with strong black or yellow-black bills, large yellow eyes and cryptic plumage. Despite being classed as waders, most species have a preference for arid or semi-arid habitats.

Indian thick-knee, Burhinus indicus
Great thick-knee, Burhinus recurvirostris (A)

Stilts and avocets
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Recurvirostridae
Recurvirostridae is a family of large wading birds, which includes the avocets and stilts. The avocets have long legs and long up-curved bills. The stilts have extremely long legs and long, thin, straight bills.

Black-winged stilt, Himantopus himantopus
Pied avocet, Recurvirostra avosetta

Ibisbill
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Ibidorhynchidae
The ibisbill is related to the waders, but is sufficiently distinctive to be a family unto itself. The adult is grey with a white belly, red legs, a long down curved bill, and a black face and breast band.

Ibisbill, Ibidorhyncha struthersii

Plovers and lapwings
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Charadriidae
The family Charadriidae includes the plovers, dotterels and lapwings. They are small to medium-sized birds with compact bodies, short, thick necks and long, usually pointed, wings. They are found in open country worldwide, mostly in habitats near water.

Pacific golden-plover, Pluvialis fulva (A)
Northern lapwing, Vanellus vanellus
River lapwing, Vanellus duvaucelii
Yellow-wattled lapwing, Vanellus malabaricus (A)
Gray-headed lapwing, Vanellus cinereus (A)
Red-wattled lapwing, Vanellus indicus
Lesser sand-plover, Charadrius mongolus (A)
Kentish plover, Charadrius alexandrinus (A)
Long-billed plover, Charadrius placidus
Little ringed plover, Charadrius dubius

Painted-snipes
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Rostratulidae
Painted-snipes are short-legged, long-billed birds similar in shape to the true snipes, but more brightly colored.

Greater painted-snipe, Rostratula benghalensis (A)

Jacanas
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Jacanidae
The jacanas are a group of tropical waders in the family Jacanidae. They are found throughout the tropics. They are identifiable by their huge feet and claws which enable them to walk on floating vegetation in the shallow lakes that are their preferred habitat.

Pheasant-tailed jacana, Hydrophasianus chirurgus (A)
Bronze-winged jacana, Metopidius indicus (A)

Sandpipers and allies
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Scolopacidae
Scolopacidae is a large diverse family of small to medium-sized shorebirds including the sandpipers, curlews, godwits, shanks, tattlers, woodcocks, snipes, dowitchers and phalaropes. The majority of these species eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or soil. Variation in length of legs and bills enables multiple species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food.

Buttonquail
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Turnicidae
The buttonquail are small, drab, running birds which resemble the true quails. The female is the brighter of the sexes and initiates courtship. The male incubates the eggs and tends the young.

Yellow-legged buttonquail, Turnix tanki
Barred buttonquail, Turnix suscitator

Pratincoles and coursers
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Glareolidae
Glareolidae is a family of wading birds comprising the pratincoles, which have short legs, long pointed wings and long forked tails, and the coursers, which have long legs, short wings and long, pointed bills which curve downwards.

Oriental pratincole, Glareola maldivarum (A)
Small pratincole, Glareola lactea

Gulls, terns, and skimmers
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Laridae
Laridae is a family of medium to large seabirds, the gulls, terns, and skimmers. Gulls are typically grey or white, often with black markings on the head or wings. They have stout, longish bills and webbed feet. Terns are a group of generally medium to large seabirds typically with grey or white plumage, often with black markings on the head. Most terns hunt fish by diving but some pick insects off the surface of fresh water. Terns are generally long-lived birds, with several species known to live in excess of 30 years.

Slender-billed gull, Chroicocephalus genei (A)
Black-headed gull, Chroicocephalus ridibundus (A)
Brown-headed gull, Chroicocephalus brunnicephalus
Pallas's gull, Ichthyaetus ichthyaetus
Common gull, Larus canus (A)
Lesser black-backed gull, Larus fuscus (A)
Little tern, Sternula albifrons (A)
Whiskered tern, Chlidonias hybrida (A)
Common tern, Sterna hirundo (A)
River tern, Sterna aurantia (A)

Storks
Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Ciconiidae
Storks are large, long-legged, long-necked, wading birds with long, stout bills. Storks are mute, but bill-clattering is an important mode of communication at the nest. Their nests can be large and may be reused for many years.

Asian openbill, Anastomus oscitans (A)
Black stork, Ciconia nigra
Asian woolly-necked stork, Ciconia episcopus
Black-necked stork, Ephippiorhynchus asiaticus (A)
Lesser adjutant, Leptoptilos javanicus (A)
Greater adjutant, Leptoptilos dubius (A)

Cormorants and shags
Order: Suliformes   Family: Phalacrocoracidae
Phalacrocoracidae is a family of medium to large coastal, fish-eating seabirds that includes cormorants and shags. Plumage colouration varies, with the majority having mainly dark plumage, some species being black-and-white and a few being colourful.

Little cormorant, Microcarbo niger
Great cormorant, Phalacrocorax carbo
Indian cormorant, Phalacrocorax fuscicollis (A)

Herons, egrets, and bitterns
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Ardeidae
The family Ardeidae contains the bitterns, herons, and egrets. Herons and egrets are medium to large wading birds with long necks and legs. Bitterns tend to be shorter necked and more wary. Members of Ardeidae fly with their necks retracted, unlike other long-necked birds such as storks, ibises and spoonbills.

Cinnamon bittern, Ixobrychus cinnamomeus (A)
Gray heron, Ardea cinerea
White-bellied heron, Ardea insignis
Great egret, Ardea alba
Intermediate egret, Ardea intermedia
Little egret, Egretta garzetta
Cattle egret, Bubulcus ibis
Indian pond-heron, Ardeola grayii
Chinese pond-heron, Ardeola bacchus (A)
Striated heron, Butorides striata
Black-crowned night-heron, Nycticorax nycticorax
Malayan night-heron, Gorsachius melanolophus (A)

Ibises and spoonbills
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Threskiornithidae
Threskiornithidae is a family of large terrestrial and wading birds which includes the ibises and spoonbills. They have long, broad wings with 11 primary and about 20 secondary feathers. They are strong fliers and despite their size and weight, very capable soarers.

Red-naped ibis, Pseudibis papillosa (A)

Osprey
Order: Accipitriformes   Family: Pandionidae
The family Pandionidae contains only one species, the osprey. The osprey is a medium-large raptor which is a specialist fish-eater with a worldwide distribution.

Osprey, Pandion haliaetus

Hawks, eagles, and kites
Order: Accipitriformes   Family: Accipitridae
Accipitridae is a family of birds of prey, which includes hawks, eagles, kites, harriers and Old World vultures. These birds have powerful hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, powerful talons and keen eyesight.

Barn-owls
Order: Strigiformes   Family: Tytonidae
Barn-owls are medium to large owls with large heads and characteristic heart-shaped faces. They have long strong legs with powerful talons.

Eastern barn owl, Tyto javanica (A)
Oriental bay-owl, Phodilus badius (A)

Owls
Order: Strigiformes   Family: Strigidae
The typical owls are small to large solitary nocturnal birds of prey. They have large forward-facing eyes and ears, a hawk-like beak and a conspicuous circle of feathers around each eye called a facial disk.

Trogons
Order: Trogoniformes   Family: Trogonidae
The family Trogonidae includes trogons and quetzals. Found in tropical woodlands worldwide, they feed on insects and fruit, and their broad bills and weak legs reflect their diet and arboreal habits. Although their flight is fast, they are reluctant to fly any distance. Trogons have soft, often colourful, feathers with distinctive male and female plumage.

Red-headed trogon, Harpactes erythrocephalus
Ward's trogon, Harpactes wardi

Hoopoes
Order: Bucerotiformes   Family: Upupidae
Hoopoes have black, white and orangey-pink colouring with a large erectile crest on their head.

Eurasian hoopoe, Upupa epops

Hornbills
Order: Bucerotiformes   Family: Bucerotidae
Hornbills are a group of birds whose bill is shaped like a cow's horn, but without a twist, sometimes with a casque on the upper mandible. Frequently, the bill is brightly coloured.

Great hornbill, Buceros bicornis
Indian grey hornbill, Ocyceros birostris (A)
Oriental pied-hornbill, Anthracoceros albirostris
Rufous-necked hornbill, Aceros nipalensis
Wreathed hornbill, Rhyticeros undulatus

Kingfishers
Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Alcedinidae
Kingfishers are medium-sized birds with large heads, long, pointed bills, short legs and stubby tails.

Blyth's kingfisher, Alcedo hercules
Common kingfisher, Alcedo atthis
Black-backed dwarf-kingfisher, Ceyx erithaca
Stork-billed kingfisher, Pelargopsis capensis
Ruddy kingfisher, Halcyon coromanda
White-throated kingfisher, Halcyon smyrnensis
Black-capped kingfisher, Halcyon pileata (A)
Crested kingfisher, Megaceryle lugubris
Pied kingfisher, Ceryle rudis

Bee-eaters
Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Meropidae
The bee-eaters are a group of near passerine birds in the family Meropidae. Most species are found in Africa but others occur in southern Europe, Madagascar, Australia and New Guinea. They are characterised by richly coloured plumage, slender bodies and usually elongated central tail feathers. All are colourful and have long downturned bills and pointed wings, which give them a swallow-like appearance when seen from afar.

Blue-bearded bee-eater, Nyctyornis athertoni
Asian green bee-eater, Merops orientalis
Blue-tailed bee-eater, Merops philippinus (A)
Chestnut-headed bee-eater, Merops leschenaulti

Rollers
Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Coraciidae
Rollers resemble crows in size and build, but are more closely related to the kingfishers and bee-eaters. They share the colourful appearance of those groups with blues and browns predominating. The two inner front toes are connected, but the outer toe is not.

Indian roller, Coracias benghalensis
Indochinese roller, Coracias affinis
Dollarbird, Eurystomus orientalis

Asian barbets
Order: Piciformes   Family: Megalaimidae
The Asian barbets are plump birds, with short necks and large heads. They get their name from the bristles which fringe their heavy bills. Most species are brightly coloured.

Coppersmith barbet, Psilopogon haemacephalus
Blue-eared barbet, Psilopogon duvaucelii
Great barbet, Psilopogon virens
Lineated barbet, Psilopogon lineatus
Golden-throated barbet, Psilopogon franklinii
Blue-throated barbet, Psilopogon asiaticus

Honeyguides
Order: Piciformes   Family: Indicatoridae
Honeyguides are among the few birds that feed on wax. They are named for the greater honeyguide which leads traditional honey-hunters to bees' nests and, after the hunters have harvested the honey, feeds on the remaining contents of the hive.

Yellow-rumped honeyguide, Indicator xanthonotus

Woodpeckers
Order: Piciformes   Family: Picidae
Woodpeckers are small to medium-sized birds with chisel-like beaks, short legs, stiff tails and long tongues used for capturing insects. Some species have feet with two toes pointing forward and two backward, while several species have only three toes. Many woodpeckers have the habit of tapping noisily on tree trunks with their beaks.

Falcons and caracaras
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Falconidae
Falconidae is a family of diurnal birds of prey. They differ from hawks, eagles and kites in that they kill with their beaks instead of their talons.

Collared falconet, Microhierax caerulescens
Pied falconet, Microhierax melanoleucus
Eurasian kestrel, Falco tinnunculus
Red-necked falcon, Falco chicquera (A)
Amur falcon, Falco amurensis
Merlin, Falco columbarius (A)
Eurasian hobby, Falco subbuteo
Oriental hobby, Falco severus
Peregrine falcon, Falco peregrinus

Old world parrots
Order: Psittaciformes   Family: Psittaculidae
Characteristic features of parrots include a strong curved bill, an upright stance, strong legs, and clawed zygodactyl feet. Many parrots are vividly coloured, and some are multi-coloured. In size they range from 8 cm (3.1 in) to 1 m (3.3 ft) in length. Old World parrots are found from Africa east across south and southeast Asia and Oceania to Australia and New Zealand.

Alexandrine parakeet, Psittacula eupatria
Rose-ringed parakeet, Psittacula krameri (I)
Slaty-headed parakeet, Psittacula himalayana
Gray-headed parakeet, Psittacula finschii (A)
Plum-headed parakeet, Psittacula cyanocephala (A)
Blossom-headed parakeet, Psittacula roseata
Red-breasted parakeet, Psittacula alexandri

Asian and Grauer's broadbills
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Eurylaimidae
The broadbills are small, brightly coloured birds, which feed on fruit and also take insects in flycatcher fashion, snapping their broad bills. Their habitat is canopies of wet forests.

Long-tailed broadbill, Psarisomus dalhousiae
Silver-breasted broadbill, Serilophus lunatus

Pittas
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Pittidae
Pittas are medium-sized by passerine standards and are stocky, with fairly long, strong legs, short tails and stout bills. Many are brightly coloured. They spend the majority of their time on wet forest floors, eating snails, insects and similar invertebrates.

Blue-naped pitta, Hydrornis nipalensis
Indian pitta, Pitta brachyura (A)
Hooded pitta, Pitta sordida

Cuckooshrikes
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Campephagidae
The cuckooshrikes are small to medium-sized passerine birds. They are predominantly greyish with white and black, although some species are brightly coloured.

Small minivet, Pericrocotus cinnamomeus
Gray-chinned minivet, Pericrocotus solaris
Short-billed minivet, Pericrocotus brevirostris
Long-tailed minivet, Pericrocotus ethologus
Scarlet minivet, Pericrocotus flammeus
Rosy minivet, Pericrocotus roseus
Large cuckooshrike, Coracina macei
Black-winged cuckooshrike, Lalage melaschistos
Black-headed cuckooshrike, Lalage melanoptera (A)

Vireos, shrike-babblers, and erpornis
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Vireonidae
Most of the members of this family are found in the New World. However, the shrike-babblers and erpornis, which only slightly resemble the "true" vireos and greenlets, are found in South East Asia.

Black-headed shrike-babbler, Pteruthius rufiventer
White-browed shrike-babbler, Pteruthius aeralatus
Green shrike-babbler, Pteruthius xanthochlorus
Black-eared shrike-babbler, Pteruthius melanotis
White-bellied erpornis, Erpornis zantholeuca

Old World orioles
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Oriolidae
The Old World orioles are colourful passerine birds. They are not related to the New World orioles.

Indian golden oriole, Oriolus kundoo
Black-naped oriole, Oriolus chinensis (A)
Slender-billed oriole, Oriolus tenuirostris
Black-hooded oriole, Oriolus xanthornus
Maroon oriole, Oriolus traillii

Woodswallows, bellmagpies, and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Artamidae
The woodswallows are soft-plumaged, somber-coloured passerine birds. They are smooth, agile flyers with moderately large, semi-triangular wings.

Ashy woodswallow, Artamus fuscus

Vangas, helmetshrikes, and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Vangidae
The family Vangidae is highly variable, though most members of it resemble true shrikes to some degree.

Large woodshrike, Tephrodornis virgatus
Common woodshrike, Tephrodornis pondicerianus
Bar-winged flycatcher-shrike, Hemipus picatus

Ioras
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Aegithinidae
The ioras are bulbul-like birds of open forest or thorn scrub, but whereas that group tends to be drab in colouration, ioras are sexually dimorphic, with the males being brightly plumaged in yellows and greens.

Common iora, Aegithina tiphia

Fantails
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Rhipiduridae
The fantails are small insectivorous birds which are specialist aerial feeders.

White-throated fantail, Rhipidura albicollis

Drongos
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Dicruridae
The drongos are mostly black or dark grey in colour, sometimes with metallic tints. They have long forked tails, and some Asian species have elaborate tail decorations. They have short legs and sit very upright when perched, like a shrike. They flycatch or take prey from the ground.

Black drongo, Dicrurus macrocercus
Ashy drongo, Dicrurus leucophaeus
Crow-billed drongo, Dicrurus annectens
Bronzed drongo, Dicrurus aeneus
Lesser racket-tailed drongo, Dicrurus remifer
Hair-crested drongo, Dicrurus hottentottus
Greater racket-tailed drongo, Dicrurus paradiseus

Monarch flycatchers
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Monarchidae
The monarch flycatchers are small to medium-sized insectivorous passerines which hunt by flycatching.

Black-naped monarch, Hypothymis azurea
Blyth's paradise-flycatcher, Terpsiphone affinis
Indian paradise-flycatcher, Terpsiphone paradisi

Shrikes
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Laniidae
Shrikes are passerine birds known for their habit of catching other birds and small animals and impaling the uneaten portions of their bodies on thorns. A typical shrike's beak is hooked, like a bird of prey.

Tiger shrike, Lanius tigrinus (A)
Brown shrike, Lanius cristatus
Bay-backed shrike, Lanius vittatus (A)
Long-tailed shrike, Lanius schach
Gray-backed shrike, Lanius tephronotus

Crows, jays, and magpies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Corvidae
The family Corvidae includes crows, ravens, jays, choughs, magpies, treepies, nutcrackers and ground jays. Corvids are above average in size among the Passeriformes, and some of the larger species show high levels of intelligence.

Eurasian jay, Garrulus glandarius
Yellow-billed blue-magpie, Urocissa flavirostris
Common green-magpie, Cissa chinensis
Rufous treepie, Dendrocitta vagabunda
Gray treepie, Dendrocitta formosae
Collared treepie, Dendrocitta frontalis
Black-rumped magpie, Pica bottanensis
Oriental magpie, Pica serica
Eurasian nutcracker, Nucifraga caryocatactes
Red-billed chough, Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax
Yellow-billed chough, Pyrrhocorax graculus
House crow, Corvus splendens
Large-billed crow, Corvus macrorhynchos
Common raven, Corvus corax

Fairy flycatchers
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Stenostiridae
Most of the species of this small family are found in Africa, though a few inhabit tropical Asia. They are not closely related to other birds called "flycatchers".

Yellow-bellied fantail, Chelidorhynx hypoxanthus
Gray-headed canary-flycatcher, Culicicapa ceylonensis

Tits, chickadees, and titmice
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Paridae
The Paridae are mainly small stocky woodland species with short stout bills. Some have crests. They are adaptable birds, with a mixed diet including seeds and insects.

Fire-capped tit, Cephalopyrus flammiceps
Yellow-browed tit, Sylviparus modestus
Sultan tit, Melanochlora sultanea
Coal tit, Periparus ater
Rufous-vented tit, Periparus rubidiventris
Gray-crested tit, Lophophanes dichrous
Green-backed tit, Parus monticolus
Cinereous tit, Parus cinereus
Japanese tit, Parus minor
Yellow-cheeked tit, Parus spilonotus

Larks
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Alaudidae
Larks are small terrestrial birds with often extravagant songs and display flights. Most larks are fairly dull in appearance. Their food is insects and seeds.

Bengal bushlark, Mirafra assamica
Horned lark, Eremophila alpestris (A)
Greater short-toed lark, Calandrella brachydactyla (A)
Hume's lark, Calandrella acutirostris (A)
Sand lark, Alaudala raytal
Oriental skylark, Alauda gulgula

Cisticolas and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Cisticolidae
The Cisticolidae are warblers found mainly in warmer southern regions of the Old World. They are generally very small birds of drab brown or grey appearance found in open country such as grassland or scrub.

Common tailorbird, Orthotomus sutorius
Himalayan prinia, Prinia crinigera
Black-throated prinia, Prinia atrogularis
Gray-crowned prinia, Prinia cinereocapilla
Rufescent prinia, Prinia rufescens
Gray-breasted prinia, Prinia hodgsonii
Jungle prinia, Prinia sylvatica
Yellow-bellied prinia, Prinia flaviventris
Ashy prinia, Prinia socialis
Plain prinia, Prinia inornata

Reed warblers and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Acrocephalidae
The members of this family are usually rather large for "warblers". Most are rather plain olivaceous brown above with much yellow to beige below. They are usually found in open woodland, reedbeds, or tall grass. The family occurs mostly in southern to western Eurasia and surroundings, but it also ranges far into the Pacific, with some species in Africa.

Thick-billed warbler, Arundinax aedon
Booted warbler, Iduna caligata (A)
Blyth's reed warbler, Acrocephalus dumetorum
Clamorous reed warbler, Acrocephalus stentoreus

Grassbirds and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Locustellidae
Locustellidae are a family of small insectivorous songbirds found mainly in Eurasia, Africa, and the Australian region. They are smallish birds with tails that are usually long and pointed, and tend to be drab brownish or buffy all over.

Striated grassbird, Megalurus palustris (A)
Brown bush warbler, Locustella luteoventris
Spotted bush warbler, Locustella thoracica
Russet bush warbler, Locustella mandelli (A)

Cupwings
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Pnoepygidae
The members of this small family are found in mountainous parts of South and South East Asia.

Scaly-breasted cupwing, Pnoepyga albiventer
Pygmy cupwing, Pnoepyga pusilla

Swallows
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Hirundinidae
The family Hirundinidae is adapted to aerial feeding. They have a slender streamlined body, long pointed wings and a short bill with a wide gape. The feet are adapted to perching rather than walking, and the front toes are partially joined at the base.

Gray-throated martin, Riparia chinensis
Bank swallow, Riparia riparia
Pale sand martin, Riparia diluta
Eurasian crag-martin, Ptyonoprogne rupestris
Barn swallow, Hirundo rustica
Red-rumped swallow, Cecropis daurica
Asian house-martin, Delichon dasypus
Nepal house-martin, Delichon nipalensis

Bulbuls
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Pycnonotidae
Bulbuls are medium-sized songbirds. Some are colourful with yellow, red or orange vents, cheeks, throats or supercilia, but most are drab, with uniform olive-brown to black plumage. Some species have distinct crests.

Black-crested bulbul, Rubigula flaviventris
Striated bulbul, Pycnonotus striatus
Red-vented bulbul, Pycnonotus cafer
Red-whiskered bulbul, Pycnonotus jocosus
Himalayan bulbul, Pycnonotus leucogenys
White-throated bulbul, Alophoixus flaveolus
Black bulbul, Hypsipetes leucocephalus
Ashy bulbul, Hemixos flavala
Mountain bulbul, Ixos mcclellandii

Leaf warblers
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Phylloscopidae
Leaf warblers are a family of small insectivorous birds found mostly in Eurasia and ranging into Wallacea and Africa. The species are of various sizes, often green-plumaged above and yellow below, or more subdued with greyish-green to greyish-brown colours.

Bush warblers and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Scotocercidae
The members of this family are found throughout Africa, Asia, and Polynesia. Their taxonomy is in flux, and some authorities place some genera in other families.

Pale-footed bush warbler, Urosphena pallidipes
Gray-bellied tesia, Tesia cyaniventer
Slaty-bellied tesia, Tesia olivea
Chestnut-crowned bush warbler, Cettia major
Gray-sided bush warbler, Cettia brunnifrons
Chestnut-headed tesia, Cettia castaneocoronata
Yellow-bellied warbler, Abroscopus superciliaris
Rufous-faced warbler, Abroscopus albogularis
Black-faced warbler, Abroscopus schisticeps
Mountain tailorbird, Phyllergates cuculatus
Broad-billed warbler, Tickellia hodgsoni
Brown-flanked bush warbler, Horornis fortipes
Hume's bush warbler, Horornis brunnescens
Aberrant bush warbler, Horornis flavolivacea

Long-tailed tits
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Aegithalidae
Long-tailed tits are a group of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They make woven bag nests in trees. Most eat a mixed diet which includes insects.

White-browed tit-warbler, Leptopoecile sophiae (A)
Black-throated tit, Aegithalos concinnus
Black-browed tit, Aegithalos iouschistos

Sylviid warblers, parrotbills, and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sylviidae
The family Sylviidae is a group of small insectivorous passerine birds. They mainly occur as breeding species, as the common name implies, in Europe, Asia and, to a lesser extent, Africa. Most are of generally undistinguished appearance, but many have distinctive songs.

Lesser whitethroat, Curruca curruca
Fire-tailed myzornis, Myzornis pyrrhoura
Golden-breasted fulvetta, Lioparus chrysotis
Jerdon's babbler, Chrysomma altirostre
Brown-throated fulvetta, Fulvetta ludlowi
White-browed fulvetta, Fulvetta vinipectus
Great parrotbill, Conostoma aemodium
Brown parrotbill, Cholornis unicolor
Gray-headed parrotbill, Psittiparus gularis
White-breasted parrotbill, Psittiparus ruficeps
Pale-billed parrotbill, Chleuasicus atrosuperciliaris
Fulvous parrotbill, Suthora fulvifrons
Black-throated parrotbill, Suthora nipalensis

White-eyes, yuhinas, and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Zosteropidae
The white-eyes are small and mostly undistinguished, their plumage above being generally some dull color like greenish-olive, but some species have a white or bright yellow throat, breast or lower parts, and several have buff flanks. As their name suggests, many species have a white ring around each eye.

Striated yuhina, Staphida castaniceps
White-naped yuhina, Yuhina bakeri
Whiskered yuhina, Yuhina flavicollis
Stripe-throated yuhina, Yuhina gularis
Rufous-vented yuhina, Yuhina occipitalis
Black-chinned yuhina, Yuhina nigrimenta
Indian white-eye, Zosterops palpebrosus

Tree-babblers, scimitar-babblers, and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Timaliidae
The babblers, or timaliids, are somewhat diverse in size and colouration, but are characterised by soft fluffy plumage.

Ground babblers and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Pellorneidae
These small to medium-sized songbirds have soft fluffy plumage but are otherwise rather diverse. Members of the genus Illadopsis are found in forests, but some other genera are birds of scrublands.

White-hooded babbler, Gampsorhynchus rufulus
Yellow-throated fulvetta, Schoeniparus cinereus
Rufous-winged fulvetta, Schoeniparus castaneceps
Rufous-throated fulvetta, Schoeniparus rufogularis
Rusty-capped fulvetta, Schoeniparus dubius
Puff-throated babbler, Pellorneum ruficeps
Spot-throated babbler, Pellorneum albiventre
Buff-breasted babbler, Pellorneum tickelli (A)
Eyebrowed wren-babbler, Napothera epilepidota
Long-billed wren-babbler, Napothera malacoptila
Abbott's babbler, Malacocincla abbotti
Indian grassbird, Graminicola bengalensis

Laughingthrushes and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Leiothrichidae
The members of this family are diverse in size and colouration, though those of genus Turdoides tend to be brown or greyish. The family is found in Africa, India, and southeast Asia.

Kinglets
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Regulidae
The kinglets, also called crests, are a small group of birds often included in the Old World warblers, but frequently given family status because they also resemble the titmice.

Goldcrest, Regulus regulus

Wallcreeper
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Tichodromidae
The wallcreeper is a small bird related to the nuthatch family, which has stunning crimson, grey and black plumage.

Wallcreeper, Tichodroma muraria

Nuthatches
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sittidae
Nuthatches are small woodland birds. They have the unusual ability to climb down trees head first, unlike other birds which can only go upwards. Nuthatches have big heads, short tails and powerful bills and feet.

Chestnut-bellied nuthatch, Sitta castanea
White-tailed nuthatch, Sitta himalayensis
Velvet-fronted nuthatch, Sitta frontalis
Beautiful nuthatch, Sitta formosa

Treecreepers
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Certhiidae
Treecreepers are small woodland birds, brown above and white below. They have thin pointed down-curved bills, which they use to extricate insects from bark. They have stiff tail feathers, like woodpeckers, which they use to support themselves on vertical trees.

Hodgson's treecreeper, Certhia hodgsoni
Bar-tailed treecreeper, Certhia himalayana (A)
Rusty-flanked treecreeper, Certhia nipalensis
Sikkim treecreeper, Certhia discolor

Wrens
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Troglodytidae
The wrens are mainly small and inconspicuous except for their loud songs. These birds have short wings and thin down-turned bills. Several species often hold their tails upright. All are insectivorous.

Eurasian wren, Troglodytes troglodytes

Spotted elachura
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Elachuridae
This species, the only one in its family, inhabits forest undergrowth throughout South East Asia.

Spotted elachura, Elachura formosa

Dippers
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Cinclidae
Dippers are a group of perching birds whose habitat includes aquatic environments in the Americas, Europe and Asia. They are named for their bobbing or dipping movements.

White-throated dipper, Cinclus cinclus
Brown dipper, Cinclus pallasii

Starlings
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sturnidae
Starlings are small to medium-sized passerine birds. Their flight is strong and direct and they are very gregarious. Their preferred habitat is fairly open country. They eat insects and fruit. Plumage is typically dark with a metallic sheen.

Golden-crested myna, Ampeliceps coronatus (A)
Common hill myna, Gracula religiosa
European starling, Sturnus vulgaris (A)
Rosy starling, Pastor roseus (A)
Indian pied starling, Gracupica contra
Brahminy starling, Sturnia pagodarum (A)
Chestnut-tailed starling, Sturnia malabarica
White-cheeked starling, Spodiopsar cineraceus (A)
Common myna, Acridotheres tristis
Bank myna, Acridotheres ginginianus
Jungle myna, Acridotheres fuscus
Spot-winged starling, Saroglossa spilopterus

Thrushes and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Turdidae
The thrushes are a group of passerine birds that occur mainly in the Old World. They are plump, soft plumaged, small to medium-sized insectivores or sometimes omnivores, often feeding on the ground. Many have attractive songs.

Old World flycatchers
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Muscicapidae
Old World flycatchers are a large group of small passerine birds native to the Old World. They are mainly small arboreal insectivores. The appearance of these birds is highly varied, but they mostly have weak songs and harsh calls.

Flowerpeckers
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Dicaeidae
The flowerpeckers are very small, stout, often brightly coloured birds, with short tails, short thick curved bills and tubular tongues.

Thick-billed flowerpecker, Dicaeum agile
Yellow-vented flowerpecker, Dicaeum chrysorrheum
Yellow-bellied flowerpecker, Dicaeum melanozanthum
Pale-billed flowerpecker, Dicaeum erythrorhynchos
Plain flowerpecker, Dicaeum minullum
Fire-breasted flowerpecker, Dicaeum ignipectus
Scarlet-backed flowerpecker, Dicaeum cruentatum

Sunbirds and spiderhunters
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Nectariniidae
The sunbirds and spiderhunters are very small passerine birds which feed largely on nectar, although they will also take insects, especially when feeding young. Flight is fast and direct on their short wings. Most species can take nectar by hovering like a hummingbird, but usually perch to feed.

Ruby-cheeked sunbird, Chalcoparia singalensis
Purple sunbird, Cinnyris asiaticus
Fire-tailed sunbird, Aethopyga ignicauda
Black-throated sunbird, Aethopyga saturata
Mrs. Gould's sunbird, Aethopyga gouldiae
Green-tailed sunbird, Aethopyga nipalensis
Crimson sunbird, Aethopyga siparaja
Little spiderhunter, Arachnothera longirostra
Streaked spiderhunter, Arachnothera magna

Fairy-bluebirds
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Irenidae
The fairy-bluebirds are bulbul-like birds of open forest or thorn scrub. The males are dark-blue and the females a duller green.

Asian fairy-bluebird, Irena puella

Leafbirds
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Chloropseidae
The leafbirds are small, bulbul-like birds. The males are brightly plumaged, usually in greens and yellows.

Golden-fronted leafbird, Chloropsis aurifrons
Orange-bellied leafbird, Chloropsis hardwickii

Weavers and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Ploceidae
The weavers are small passerine birds related to the finches. They are seed-eating birds with rounded conical bills. The males of many species are brightly coloured, usually in red or yellow and black, some species show variation in colour only in the breeding season.

Streaked weaver, Ploceus manyar
Baya weaver, Ploceus philippinus
Finn's weaver, Ploceus megarhynchus
Black-breasted weaver, Ploceus benghalensis

Waxbills and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Estrildidae
The estrildid finches are small passerine birds of the Old World tropics and Australasia. They are gregarious and often colonial seed eaters with short thick but pointed bills. They are all similar in structure and habits, but have wide variation in plumage colours and patterns.

White-rumped munia, Lonchura striata
Scaly-breasted munia, Lonchura punctulata
Pin-tailed parrotfinch, Erythrura prasina (A)

Accentors
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Prunellidae
The accentors are in the only bird family, Prunellidae, which is completely endemic to the Palearctic. They are small, fairly drab species superficially similar to sparrows.

Alpine accentor, Prunella collaris
Altai accentor, Prunella himalayana
Robin accentor, Prunella rubeculoides
Rufous-breasted accentor, Prunella strophiata
Brown accentor, Prunella fulvescens (A)
Maroon-backed accentor, Prunella immaculata

Old World sparrows
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Passeridae
Old World sparrows are small passerine birds. In general, sparrows tend to be small, plump, brown or grey birds with short tails and short powerful beaks. Sparrows are seed eaters, but they also consume small insects.

House sparrow, Passer domesticus
Russet sparrow, Passer cinnamomeus
Eurasian tree sparrow, Passer montanus

Wagtails and pipits
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Motacillidae
Motacillidae is a family of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They include the wagtails, longclaws and pipits. They are slender, ground feeding insectivores of open country.

Finches, euphonias, and allies
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Fringillidae
Finches are seed-eating passerine birds, that are small to moderately large and have a strong beak, usually conical and in some species very large. All have twelve tail feathers and nine primaries. These birds have a bouncing flight with alternating bouts of flapping and gliding on closed wings, and most sing well.

Longspurs and snow buntings
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Calcariidae
The Calcariidae are a group of passerine birds which had been traditionally grouped with the New World sparrows, but differ in a number of respects and are usually found in open grassy areas.

Lapland longspur, Calcarius lapponicus (A)

Old World buntings
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Emberizidae
The emberizids are a large family of passerine birds. They are seed-eating birds with distinctively shaped bills. Many emberizid species have distinctive head patterns.

Crested bunting, Emberiza lathami
Godlewski's bunting, Emberiza godlewskii (A)
Gray-necked bunting, Emberiza buchanani (A)
Little bunting, Emberiza pusilla
Rustic bunting, Emberiza rustica (A)
Black-faced bunting, Emberiza spodocephala (A)

See also
List of birds
Lists of birds by region

References

Lepage, Denis. "Checklist of Birds of Bhutan". Bird Checklists of the World. Avibase. Retrieved 27 April 2020.
Clements, James F. (2000). Birds of the World: A Checklist. Cornell University Press. p. 880. ISBN 0-934797-16-1.
Inskipp, Carol; et al. (2004). Timeless Field Guides: Birds of Bhutan. Timeless Books. p. 192.